Brother Mark Sanderson has labored over his material and is looking forward to
presenting his talk. It's entitled, Your Labor is not in vain. Brother Sanderson,
you have our ears. The date was September 8th, 1922, Cedar Point, Ohio. Brother
Rutherford, before that assembled crowd, said those words that still ring in
our ears. He said, Behold, the King reigns. You are his publicity agents.
Therefore, advertise, advertise, advertise the King and his kingdom. Well, what a
call to action that was by Brother Rutherford. And in those few words, Brother
Rutherford showed that he recognized something that is very important. The
faithful men and women that were in that audience, and so many others who have
followed them since, were to be Jehovah's publicity agents. They were to be
preachers and teachers of the good news of God's kingdom. Now, that's a simple
fact, but it reveals something amazing about our Heavenly Father, Jehovah. Although
He is so almighty, although just one angel could kill 185,000 in one night, we
know Jehovah could use any miraculous means in order to accomplish this
preaching work. But how has Jehovah chosen to accomplish it? By using imperfect
ordinary men and women like you and like me in order to accomplish the greatest
preaching work that has ever been accomplished in history? It reminds us of what
the Apostle Paul wrote here in 1 Corinthians chapter 1. Will you open your
Bibles and read it with me? 1 Corinthians 1 in verse 26, the Apostle Paul said,
For you see his calling of you, brothers, that there are not many in a
wise and a fleshly way, not many powerful, not many of noble birth. But God
shows the foolish things of the world to put the wise men to shame. And God
shows the weak things of the world to put the strong things to shame. And God
shows the insignificant things of the world. And the things looked down on. The
things that are not to bring to nothing the things that are so that no one might
boast in the sight of God. Well, perhaps those in Corinth thought that being a
new movement that the Jehovah would raise up people who are powerful, people from
important families, people who had great worldly wisdom, but that was not the
means that Jehovah was going to use. He was going to use people who were
described as unlettered and ordinary. Well, for what purpose? Well, really to
magnify him, to magnify his almightiness, that he could use these imperfect
people to accomplish this tremendous work. And really, so that no human could
ever boast in what was accomplished. Well, when those words of Brother
Brotherford went out, that call to action, our brothers got busy. Brother
Melvin Sargent, who was baptized in 1912, and who was present there in Cedar Point
to hear those words, said this, those of us inside the Lord's organization have
tried in every way possible to turn their attention to the message of life. We
have used slogans, full-page advertisements, radio, sound cars, portable
phonographs, gigantic conventions, parades of information walkers carrying
signs, and a growing army of house to house ministers. How true? And perhaps
some of you shared in some of those different activities and you used those
tools. Well, what about today? Today, brothers, we have amazing tools to help
us to accomplish the work. Things that we could never even have imagined,
JW.org, the JW Library app, our language app, JW Broadcasting, as well as
literature that's now available in literally hundreds and hundreds of
languages. But, brothers, no matter how wonderful any of these tools are, no
matter how many tools we ever produce, we cannot forget one simple point, tools
need users. And that means that every one of you, every publisher of the good
news of God's kingdom, is absolutely essential, is absolutely needed to
accomplish this work. Do you agree with me? And we have to say that as a
governing body, as we travel, we see you preaching boldly from house to house.
We see your literature carts and airports on public corners in train stations.
The work that you are accomplishing is amazing. And you are to be commended for
your hard work in preaching. It's much like the Apostle Paul said here in
1 Corinthians chapter 15 and verse 58. He said, therefore my beloved brothers be
steadfast, immovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord,
knowing that your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord. Well,
that's what you're doing. You see, you have plenty to do in the work of the
Lord. But let's ask another question. We know, of course, that our labor is not
in vain. But could we, from time to time, come to that wrong conclusion? Could we
begin to think that our labor really is in vain? Well, let's consider three
different areas where we might wrongfully come to that conclusion. Here's the
first. With the advancing age, with increasing health challenges, we may begin to
think, well, my voice is really very, very small. I really cannot contribute very
much anymore to the preaching of the good news. Well, if that's the way you may
have felt, it might be encouraging to think about what we did today, the release of our
brand new songbook. Now, isn't it true? We love to listen to our choral singing. But
now, when you listen to that choral singing, what is it that makes it beautiful? Is it
the fact that there's two or three loud booming voices that overpower everyone? No. The
beauty lies in all of the voices coming together, harmonizing, making beautiful
music that praises Jehovah. So, what can we learn from that? Well, you see, whether
our voice is loud or whether our voice is very soft or very small, we all can
contribute to this wonderful chorus that's being sung around this earth to praise
Jehovah. And as brothers explained so nicely mentioned in his talk, the principle of
2 Corinthians chapter 8 and verse 12 must be very powerful in our minds. You see there,
the Apostle Paul said, for if the readiness is there first, it is especially acceptable
according to what a person has and not according to what a person does not have. When,
now, of course, we apply that to many different types of giving. We apply it to our literal
contributions of material things, but we also can apply it to our use of our time, our
energy, our abilities, everything that we give for the preaching of this good news.
So the question is, not what do you not have, but the question is what do you have? Do
you have a voice? Well, whether it's strong or soft, use it. Continue to use it to praise
Jehovah. If you use sign language to communicate, well, then use your hands to be able to
tell others about the good news of God's kingdom. Just recently, a brother sent me an experience
of a Bible student in India who is both deaf and also was born with no arms. Now, how can
this man communicate? Can you imagine? He's learned to do sign language with his feet,
and he is able to communicate and express his voice in that way. Isn't that wonderful?
We can use what we have to praise Jehovah. And I have to say, the governing body deeply
appreciate all of the hard work that you, brothers, are doing, whether your voices loud
and strong or quite weak. We appreciate every one of you and the work that you're doing
in preaching the good news of God's kingdom.
But now, let's talk about a second area where we might think that our labor is in vain.
This is when we say, well, someone's work is really far better than mine. They can do
so much more than I can. Well, it is a human tendency for us to want to compare ourselves
with others. But what is the counsel that we have from God's Word in this regard? Let's
read Galatians chapter 6, and verse 4, Galatians 6, and verse 4 says, but let each one examine
his own actions. And then he will have cause for rejoicing in regard to himself alone and
not in comparison with the other person. Yes, we have to look at what we can do and what we can
contribute to the work ourselves. And in this regard, we have a beautiful example that comes
from our modern day history that I'd like to share with you. It's the example of a brother
named Adolf Weber. Now, brother Weber was baptized in Allegheny, Pennsylvania all the way back
in the year 1890. Now, that's a long time ago, isn't it? Now, who was this man? He was a Swiss
woodcutter. He had come to America, and he worked with brother Russell as a gardener.
He obtained a very deep knowledge of the scriptures from working with brother Russell.
After a time, brother Weber wanted, with all his heart, to go back to Europe and begin preaching
in the French language territories. But now, who was he? Well, the yearbook, I'll quote it,
I won't try to make any judgments because I didn't know what brother Weber. But here's what it said.
Brother Weber was a simple man of peasant-like appearance. Well, if you see his picture in the
Proclamers book, you might agree with that. But at the same time, the yearbook said he was a devout
mature Christian who knew well the English, French, and German languages. In fact, he translated
the studies in the scriptures and other early publications into French. Well, as soon as he got
back to Switzerland, brother Weber got busy. He placed advertisements in French language religious
newspapers and magazines for volume one of the studies in the scriptures and other books of
brother Russell. Well, as a result, people began to order brother Russell's publications. They
began to subscribe to the Watchtower in French. Brother Weber went on big preaching campaigns.
He would go through Switzerland, placing tracts. He would go to France and Belgium. And he would
meet with people who had ordered literature or who had subscribed for the Watchtower, all the while
supporting himself by doing woodcutting or gardening. But now, were all of these efforts blessed by
Jehovah? Yes, because throughout that territory in Switzerland, in France and Belgium, many began to
associate and began to serve Jehovah. But then what happened? In 1912, brother Russell was on a trip
through Europe. And he decided to arrange to open a French language office in Geneva, Switzerland.
And so, when brother Russell looked at the candidates available, he felt that there were other
brothers who were better educated who should now take over the work. Well, now, how would that affect
brother Weber? Hear this humble man who had worked so hard to get everything established. Now, being
asked as it were to turn over the reins, well, brother Weber didn't hesitate a bit. The
yearbook says he gladly stepped down in favor of the more educated brothers. Well, was he discouraged?
Did he give up? Did he try to compare himself with those other men? No, the yearbook went on to say
that he kept a good spirit. He continued making his pilgrim visits to the congregations and visiting
the isolated brothers who spoke French. But what happened? Do you know the end of the story?
Well, just after a few years, those well-educated brothers who had been placed in charge of the work. Do
you know what happened to them? They all proved to be unfaithful. And what happened? Well, where's
brother Weber? We have to go and find this dear humble man bringing him back. He has to go and
strengthen the brothers, encourage them, readjust them, which he gladly did.
Despite the many challenges that this brother experienced, he continued to strengthen and fortify
the brothers until he finished his earthly course sometime about the year 1947. What's the lesson
that we can learn? See, brother Weber demonstrated the truth of Galatians chapter 6 and verse 4. He proved
what his own work was. He was content to be a lesser one and to use his abilities and his
spirituality to be a source of encouragement to others. He did not spend all of his time comparing
himself with others, but he brought what he had and he used it to honor Jehovah. Well, his labor
was not in vain. Do you know in the area where he opened up the work so long ago, there are well
over 100,000 publishers who are praising Jehovah's name. What a powerful lesson we can learn
from this simple, humble brother, Adolf Weber. But now let's talk about our final area where we
might begin to think that our labor is in vain. Perhaps some of you here have been serving at
Bethel for decades, many, many years, and now you have been reassigned to the field. Others of you
may be circuit overseers who have reached the age of 70, and now you've begun to serve as regular
or as special pioneers. Well, now should any of you in that situation feel that your labors have
been in vain? Absolutely not. Quite frankly, brothers, if possible, all of us at Bethel should return
to the field, if it were possible. Because what did Jesus say at Matthew 9 and verse 37? Yes,
the harvest is great, but the workers are few. Therefore beg the master of the harvest to send out
workers into his harvest. Yes, the workers are needed out in the field. And these dear brothers
and sisters who have returned to the field who are now in the pioneer service, they are accomplishing
tremendous work. Just as the Gilead School now has been designed to train special full-time
servants to strengthen and stabilize, what now these ones who have returned to the field are
having a powerful strengthening effect on the congregations. They're sharing their experience,
their maturity, the many wonderful lessons that they learned from all of those years either in
Bethel service or in traveling work. Now, you know the governing body receives many letters from
the field, many letters of appreciation, but I'd like to just quote from one that we recently
received, a sister wrote to the governing body and she said this, I want to thank you for sending
into the field those who have served in special full-time service. Well, I cannot imagine how hard
the decision must have been. I know I have benefited beyond words from having such dear ones in my
congregation. They are truly a treasure from Jehovah, what a blessing to all those that have such
ones in their congregation. I thank you so much. Well, now that's just one letter, but those words
have been echoed by publishers in this country and all around the world who have received these
well, a qualified individuals coming to their congregation. So, dear brothers and sisters,
we'd like to say to all of those of you who have been reassigned, how much we love you,
how much we respect you, how much we appreciate your work, your labor is not in vain.
Well, it truly is thrilling to be a part of Jehovah's organization at this time. From those small
beginnings back in 1922 to today, it's amazing to see what has been accomplished. Now, more than
eight million publishers of the good news, our magnificent, our wonderful God, Jehovah, has chosen
to accomplish this tremendous preaching work using ordinary imperfect people. And we have been given
the tremendous privilege to be His fellow workers. Brothers, are you determined to continue to
preach along with us until we say that this work is finally completed? Then may all of us have
plenty to do in the work of the Lord with full confidence that our labor will never be in vain.
We certainly want to thank Mark for that fine talk, and it's encouraging to know that our
labor will never be in vain. So, Jehovah remembers us for the efforts that we put forth in our service,
and he remembers us for good. Next, we have Brother Garrett Loosh with a rousing subject force.
The theme is be a conqueror. The English word conqueror refers to one that conquers.
To conquer means to defeat someone or something. The Spanish explorers and warriors who successfully
conquered much of America in the 16th century are called conquistadores or conquerors. One of them
was Hernán Cortés who conquered the Aztec Empire. At the peak, the Spanish Empire ruled over 19.4
million square kilometers or 7.5 million square miles. But who conquered more land than the
Spanish, the Mongols, and the British? At its greatest extent, the British Empire was known as
the largest empire in history as it covered more than 13 million square miles or 33.7 million
square kilometers, which is approximately a quarter of the Earth's total land area. Despite its
overseas holdings, it was barely bigger than the Mongol Empire under Kublai Khan.
The British Empire was bigger only because of its overseas land holdings. The Mongols were a
nomadic people who originated from the grassland plateau of what is today Mongolia
in Central and Northeast Asia. Their speedy conquest beginning in the early 13th century of our
common era changed the face of Asia in half of Europe. In just 25 years, the Mongols subjugated
the inhabitants of more territories than the Romans had conquered in four centuries.
At the peak of their power, they ruled from Vietnam to Hungary a distance of about 5,500 miles
or 8,700 kilometers. And from Siberia to India, the largest contiguous land empire in recorded
history, including modern times. Then there was Hitler who saw himself as a world conqueror.
He promoted the slogan, today, Germany belongs to us, tomorrow, the whole world.
His attempt to conquer the world failed miserably. How about the conquest in Biber times?
After the exodus of the Israelites from Egypt in 513 before our common era,
Jehovah told the Israelites to conquer the land of Canaan. They were afraid and disobeyed
besides Moses, only Joshua and Caleb were willing to fight.
Number 1330 says, then Caleb tried to calm the people as they stood before Moses by saying,
let us go up immediately and we are sure to take possession of it because we can surely conquer it.
For the lack of faith, the Israelites had to wander for 40 years in the wilderness,
after that they conquered Canaan during a period of about five years.
In King Jehosophad's day, Jehovah caused a victory over the Ammonites, Moabites and
Edomites from Seir and Alliance of Nations. Israel did not conquer in their own strength,
but Jehovah gave them the victory by confusing the enemy alliance so they killed each other,
according to 2 Chronicles chapter 21 through 4. What about the conquest in the time of the end?
Do you know a world conqueror that conquered a larger area than the Mongols and the British
empires? Well, Revelation 6 verse 2 gives the answer. We can read about that conqueror.
And I saw and looked a white horse and the one seated on it had a bow and a crown was given him,
well we know that, refers to Jesus, and he went out conquering and to complete his conquest.
Well, Jesus now rules over the whole earth. When did he go out to conquer in 1914 of our
common era, and when will he complete his conquest at Armageddon? Who did Jesus already conquer?
First he conquered Satan and the demons throwing them out of heaven and restricting their movements
to the earth and its vicinity. This war is described in Revelation chapter 12.
But in 1914 his conquest was not complete yet. At Armageddon it will be. Satan will be thrown into
an abyss of inactivity and at the end of the 4,000 years he will be totally destroyed.
What a conquest that will be. At Armageddon also all human governments will likewise be conquered.
Let's read Revelation chapter 17 verse 4. We'll find this prophecy.
It says to the one, these will battle with the lamb, but because he is Lord of lords and king of kings,
the lamb will conquer them. Also those with him who are called and chosen and faithful,
anointed Christians will do so. How about spiritual conquests? In Revelation chapter 2 and 3,
seven times Jesus says with reference to the one who conquers. One example is Revelation 321.
It says to the one who conquers I will grant to sit down with me on my throne, just as I conquered
and sat down with my father on his throne. How do the anointed conquer even right now before Armageddon?
They conquer by remaining loyal to Jehovah. They conquer due to their faith, due to their love for
Jehovah and Jesus. They also conquer the evil with the good in everyday life.
What about the great crowd mentioned in Revelation chapter 7? Talking about the situation
on earth under the misionic kingdom, Revelation 21 7 says, to anyone thirsting, I will give from
the spring of water of life free. Anyone conquering will inherit these things, and I will be his God
and he will be my son. The Revelation climax book, therefore, says on page 304,
the great crowd too must conquer. Even children can be conquerors. When a child is
shoved by a sibling, usually the child's first reaction is to shove back. Sadly, such behavior is
not limited to children. Many adults act similarly. When offended by someone, they want to get even
granted. Most adults will not give a literal shove, but many will push back in more subtle ways.
Whatever method is used, the intent is the same, to retaliate. Although the urge to get even
as deep seated, true Christians resist giving in to that urge. Instead, they strive to follow the
Apostle Paul's admonition of Romans 12-17, return evil for evil to no one. Paul explains in detail
how all of us can conquer in everyday life. He wrote in Romans 12-20-21, if your enemy is hungry,
feed him, if he's thirsty, give him something to drink. For by doing this, you will heap fiery
coals upon his head. Do not let yourself be conquered by the evil, but keep conquering the evil
with the good back to your children. How can you conquer the evil with the good if a sibling or
a classmate says something or does something unkind? You conquer by not retaliating. A worldly
nursery rhyme puts it this way, tit for that, you kill my dog, I kill you cat, maybe some of you
know that. But Jesus tells us to forgive. Do something good, pray for the other child.
Because another has made a mistake, is no reason for us to make one also, is it?
Jehovah does not want us to retaliate. In 1 Thessalonians 5-15, it says, see that no one renders
injury for injury to anyone else, but always pursue what is good toward one another and to all others.
Therefore, children, are you willing to conquer the evil with the good?
We want to commend you for your effort to do that. You are making Jehovah's heart glad this way.
How can we all conquer spiritually? We do so by not retaliating. This is the way of love. Many came
into the truth because of a Christian mate doing good to an unbelieving mate for decades, although
having been treated terribly. In the domestic setting, a wife who shows genuine kindness,
there has been, after he makes unpleasant comments about her beliefs or yells at her,
may well diffuse a potentially explosive situation, such sisters conquer evil with good.
We want to commend all of you who are not giving up on your unbelieving marriage mate.
If you show understanding and compassion to the person who is treating you badly,
you might make him or her want to learn more about the Bible, more about Jehovah. No matter what
she responds, you are mild and kind. Actions and words make the person wonder why you are different.
1 Peter 3, 4 refers to the quote, incorruptible adornment of the quiet and mild spirit, quiet and mild
spirit. On one island, the Pentecostal woman started to study the Bible, but her
opposed her husband did, of course, not like it. He even threatened the elders.
But then he fell sick. It was taken to a hospital where he fell into a coma.
When he eventually regained consciousness, two sisters visited and brought him some soup,
which he first thought was for his wife. No, the soup is for you, said the sisters.
That touched me deeply, he recalls. No Pentecostal had visited me, yet two of Jehovah's
witnesses. The very people I had strongly opposed brought me a meal. He recovered from his illness.
He studied twice a week and was baptized in 1998. Do you want to hear another soup experience?
Two brothers in Russia were preaching from house to house one morning. A woman listened to their
introduction and then excused herself. She returned with a pot of boiled red beet soup.
And through this on the brothers, adding angrily, do not visit me again.
The brothers returned home to change their clothes and then continued their activity.
Later that day, they went to the market to order
ingredients needed for a good portion. That evening, they visited the same woman again.
They told her that this time they came not to preach, but to compensate her for the loss of the
her family's food, knowing that the soup she had wasted might have been the entire family meal.
Then they handed her the food stuff that they had purchased. The woman was so surprised that
she invited the brothers in to talk. In time, a Bible study was started with this woman.
When non-witnesses treat us badly, it is to be expected. But when problems occur with a spiritual
brother or sister, the pain can be much deeper. One brother recalled,
my biggest hurdle when coming into the truth was accepting the fact that Jehovah's people are
not perfect. Thus, if a fellow Christian, especially one with privileges in the congregation,
is thoughtless in and acts in an un-Christian way, it can hurt us. How can such things occur
among Jehovah's people, some may ask? Actually, such things did occur even among anointed Christians in
the days of the Apostles. How should we respond when we are affected? We can forgive and we can
pray for them. This way, we prove ourselves to be conquerors. We call the experience of Joseph.
His brothers dealt cruelly with him, but he conquered the bad they did to him with good,
resulting in happiness for all and certainly also for Jehovah. Brothers in Nazi times and in
concentration camps did not retaliate when mistreated by SS officers. Because of that, some of the
SS officers came into the truth. Some officers in camps preferred to be shaved by the brothers,
only the brothers. As they were nervous, if other prisoners would do it,
fearing that one would perhaps retaliate and cut the throat in the revenge.
Twelve sisters were in the camp of Birkenau only a few days, then they were taken to another camp
Auschwitz to work in the homes of SS officers. They wanted only Jehovah's witnesses for that,
these officers. They were afraid of having others working in their households. They trusted that
the sisters would not try to poison them. In the 1960s, I met Franz Desch from Yenbach, Austria.
He was taken to the Gusion concentration camp. There, he was able to study the Bible with an
SS officer. How much progress was made? Well, imagine the great joy of both of them, when some
years later, they met as brothers at the convention. Now let's talk about conquering opposition today.
The pressures of life in this wicked system can make people feel angry, although we are kind,
peaceful and law abiding. Jehovah's enemies launched vicious attacks against us,
like some people in lands such as Russia, some slanderers in the press or even in courts.
Some governments have banned the God's people, and Jesus said that his followers are to expect that.
In the future, as the great tribulation gets closer, we may have to face even more opposition.
How should we react? Romans 12, 17, never return evil for evil in word or deed.
Regardless of what the devil and his agents bring upon us, by conquering the evil with the good,
we can give a fine witness. An important key is using gracious speech, Proverbs 25-15.
A mild tongue itself can break a bone. Jesus is the best example of not retaliating when the
Apostle Peter cut off the ear of Malkus in the Garden of Gethsemane. Jesus reproved him and healed
Malkus. He did good to Malkus, although he was a member of that mob that had come to arrest Jesus.
Well, Jesus was perfect. We are not, but we need to conquer also ourselves. We need to conquer
wrong attitudes or bad habits that we might have. To conquer also means, according to
a dictionary, to gain control of a problem or difficulty through great effort. Many of us,
when we came into the truth, have conquered the smoking habit, overuse of alcohol or drug addiction
with great effort. Then there's the bad habit of viewing pornography. According to one estimate,
the number of pornographic emails that are sent daily amount to 2.5 billion or 1.7 million per minute.
Great effort is needed to conquer the addiction of viewing pornography. After baptism,
there may be more things to conquer like over-eating, violent temper, the inclination to gossip,
perhaps truthfully, but negatively about others. It also includes conquering an exaggerated fear of
men. Faith in Jehovah will help you to conquer such fears. Governments may try to restrict freedom
to worship God, and we may even feel not sure about our own lives. But remember, the antidote to fear of
man is faith in Jehovah. 1 John 5, 5 asks, who can conquer the world? Is it not the one who has
faith that Jesus is the Son of God? The previous verse verse 4 says, and this is the conquest that
has conquered the world, our faith. In view of the matchless power, Jehovah could force us to conquer
every weakness without having to struggle or to learn from our mistakes. But why does he not do so?
Jehovah has given us the precious gift of free will. By choosing to do God's will and by working
hard to do so, we show the depth of our love for Jehovah and our desire to please him.
We are conquerors even now. Jesus did not say he will conquer at the end of the system of things.
He said that he already had conquered when he was on earth. John 1633 says,
in the world you will have tribulation, but take courage. I have conquered the world.
In the verse before, Jesus said, the father is with me, John 1632. So, yes, Jehovah helped him to
conquer. Jesus did not have to fight alone and neither do we have to fight alone. Jehovah and
Jesus are on our side to support us. Paul said, Jehovah is my helper. I will not be afraid.
What can man do to me? Hebrews 136. Be determined to keep conquering the world.
Winning one fight is not enough. We have to keep fighting. To conquer is a continuous action.
We need endurance. Second Corinthians 4.16 Paul said, we do not give up.
The Spanish, the Mongols and the British did not conquer their territories in a day or week
or a month. Similarly, Romans 12-21 says, do not let yourself be conquered, but keep conquering the
evil with the good. Continuous action. Here's a true of us. Since we're much weaker than Jesus
and since we're imperfect, we can conquer the evil. We can conquer the world, but we cannot
conquer Satan. First John 2.14 says, I write you, young men, because you are strong,
and the word of God remains in you and listen. You have conquered the wicked one.
Yes, they have conquered Satan back in the first century. We can do the same today. We will not
be able to conquer Satan out of his existence. Soon, though, Jehovah will use Jesus and
the anointed to throw Satan and the demons into an abyss of inactivity, and at the end of the
millennium they will crush Satan's head completely, according to Romans 16-20. Satan and the demons
are not conquerors of God's people. They are losers. Jehovah will also direct Christ Jesus to
crush and put an end to all human political systems. They also will end up being losers. Now,
read Romans chapter 8, 37 to 39, and this assures all faithful ones. It says,
in all these things, we are coming off completely victorious through the one who loved us,
for I'm convinced that neither death nor life, no angels, no governments, no things now,
things to come, no powers, no height, no depths. Now, any other creation will be able to separate us
from God's love that is in Christ Jesus, our Lord. In review, be assured that we can spiritually
conquer the world by remaining loyal to Jehovah, to Jesus and the kingdom. We can spiritually conquer
evil by our faith, by our love, and by doing good. Second, we can also spiritually conquer
our own bad habits or wrong attitudes. Third, we can spiritually conquer Satan the devil,
and we can do it even now. Fourth, finally, Jesus and the anointed will completely conquer Satan,
the demons, and all human governments in opposition to Jehovah at Armageddon, the climax of the
coming Great Tribulation. What strong encouragement we have to continue to be conquerors.
Thank you very much, Brother Loach. We needed those words of encouragement to be world conquerors.
We appreciate your help. Now, pay close attention to Brother Jeffrey Jackson.
As expected, he has an intriguing title for us. Expect the unexpected.
I'm sure every one of us here today would agree that this year's regional convention program was
absolutely fantastic. And probably one of the most common comments that have been made is that
many brothers and sisters have said, this convention has truly prepared us for the Great Tribulation.
And we certainly feel that way. But as our minds think about the Great Tribulation and the
importance of Jesus' words, it's true at times that our imagination perhaps becomes very active.
We have maybe have questions. How long will be the Great Tribulation? How will it affect me personally?
Would I be able to get my medication? What about my cat? Well, the short answer to all those
intriguing questions is we don't know. But there is something that we do know beyond any doubt whatsoever.
Let's turn to the book of 2nd Peter, chapter 2 and verse 9. And this fact fills us with confidence
as we look to the future to the outbreak of the Great Tribulation. So 2nd Peter, chapter 2 and verse 9.
There it tells us. So then Jehovah knows how to rescue people of Godly devotion out of trial.
Yes, brothers and sisters, we know Jehovah. We know his record. We have studied the scriptures.
And we totally believe that no matter what happens, even though we don't know the details of what
the future holds, we believe that Jehovah knows how to rescue righteous persons. And we've seen
time and time again how Jehovah does the unexpected. When we look through the scriptures,
that point is emphasized over and over again. There are two scriptures that help to fortify
this faith and belief that we have. Let's look at them together. The first one is found in the book
of Ephesians. Ephesians chapter 3 and verse 20. Ephesians 3 verse 20. Hear the apostle Paul under
inspiration tells us, now to the one who can, according to his power that is operating in us,
do more than super abundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive. Now this is a fantastic
expression in the writing department. If we were to write this, I'm sure the proofreaders would
correct it, but this is under inspiration. First start, let's think of the word super abundantly.
Now the proofreaders may tell us for a start, abundant is enough, but here we have super abundantly.
Now it doesn't stop there, does it? Because Paul then says under inspiration, more than super abundantly.
And it gets even better beyond all the things we ask or conceive. This is certainly making the
point, isn't it? And what is the point? That Jehovah can do things beyond what we would expect.
It's so interesting for us to note that Jehovah does not limit himself to what we ask for in our
prayers. And we can be happy of that because he goes beyond anything that we could ever think of
to solve our problems. So it's true at times we may see no way out of our problems. We may feel
overwhelmed, but remember what does it say here? Jehovah has the power to do more than super abundantly
beyond all the things we ask or conceive. Now the second scripture is in the book of Philippians,
chapter 4 and verse 6. Here again, we're told, do not be anxious over anything,
but in everything by prayer and supplication, along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made
known to God, and the peace of God that now notice again, surpasses all understanding.
Will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus? Have you noticed
in several of the talks today, the point has been made over and over again that this
pressure of possession that we have is our relationship with Jehovah. We need to trust him.
Now when the peace of God comes to us because of praying to Jehovah and trusting him,
what does it say here? Then that surpasses all understanding. Other translations put it this way,
surpasses all our dreams, excels all human planning is more wonderful than we can imagine.
Truly brothers and sisters, we don't need to know all the details of what the future holds.
We know that our loving God Jehovah will do things in a wonderful way.
Yes, he does the unexpected and he does it with style. That's the amazing thing.
As we read through the scriptures, we see this over and over again. Let's think about
Haman back in the days of Esther and Mordecai. Haman had a lot of money, a lot of influence,
and a plan he wanted to commit genocide to destroy all of God's people, and it looked like the
plan was going to succeed. But Haman didn't know what Jehovah had in mind. Esther, Mordecai were in
place and how things turned out. The very day that the Jews should have been slaughtered and
completely eradicated was the day that their enemies were killed instead. But as we read through those
events, Jehovah did so many unexpected things. Personally, I just love chapter 6. Right in the middle
of this intrigue where we see what Jehovah is preparing, then there's an account about the king
not being able to sleep. Isn't it wonderful? You see, Haman comes in at the wrong time for Haman.
He assumes wrongly that the king is going to bless him. And what's the result? He has to be
humiliated, walking around in front of Mordecai on a horse, wearing the king's clothes. That's
style. Jehovah didn't have to do that, but when we look back on it, that really is style, isn't it?
And we can be sure that Jehovah will continue to do these things for his people. Recently, of course,
we just watched that beautiful presentation with regard to Hezekiah. Didn't that full length
movie help us to imagine exactly what happened at that time? But in the case of Hezekiah,
what did he do in the time leading up to that event? Well, he fortified the city, he stopped
up the well so the Assyrians wouldn't be able to get water. He did all sorts of things to plan.
And yet, none of that was needed. Why? He didn't realize what Jehovah is going to do. The
unexpected. We didn't even expect it when we saw that angel in the movie. Did we?
What a wonderful presentation it was. But you see, Jehovah again did the unexpected. None of his
people were thinking that Jehovah would do that. And yet, he had the situation under control.
And of course, time and time again as we look through the scriptures, we see this emphasized
Moses and Israelites, if we were standing with them there on the shores of the Dead Sea,
where the Egyptians coming behind us, who of us would have ever guessed that Jehovah is now
going to part the Red Sea? I mean, that was unexpected. It was also unexpected that the Egyptians
would be so stupid to follow the Israelites. And yet it resulted in a wonderful victory for Jehovah's
people. You see, expect the unexpected when it comes to what Jehovah does.
Now, thinking back to what the Apostle Paul was inspired to say to the brothers in Philippi,
let's think about the setting of when he wrote that and a little bit of the background.
The Apostle Paul said, basically, don't worry, pray, because Jehovah can do the unexpected.
Well, was Paul perhaps writing that particular time as an academic sitting behind a desk,
someone who is testing out something he doesn't really know about? Of course not. We remember back
at that time in 60 to 61 CE, the Apostle Paul was imprisoned and wrong. He'd already experienced
many, many different hardships. He, you, what it was like to be in the time of trial.
But even the very fact that he was writing to the brothers in Philippi is of interest.
Let's just refresh our memories about this. You'll see the record in Acts 16.
But what actually happened 10 years before Paul wrote the letter to the brothers in Philippi?
Well, Paul was in Asia Minor. He was going, trying to find somewhere where the Holy Spirit would
allow him to preach. So he went to one location, no. Went to another location, no. Eventually,
arrives at Troas. And there, one evening, he sees a Macedonian man. And what does he say,
step over to Macedonia? Well, Paul naturally assumed this was Johova's direction.
And immediately, he made plans to step over to Macedonia. And this actually started the
preaching work in Europe. Well, he arrived first at the seaport of Neapolis and then made his way
to Philippi. Well, immediately there was some success. Some started to accept the message.
But what happened shortly thereafter? Well, as we already mentioned today, the account tells us that
Paul and Silas were beaten up and thrown into a dungeon, into a prison. Now, if you were Paul
and you were sitting there in prison with your back painting, singing songs to bring yourself comfort,
perhaps would you think this, what is Johova doing? I mean, I was in Asia Minor. I could have
preached anywhere in Asia Minor, but no. The vision sets step over into Macedonia. Now, I'm
assuming there's a big door of activity open, but now here I am in prison. Why did Johova
direct me to come here? I'm sure I think most of us would probably start thinking along that line
and perhaps we discouraged. Perhaps at times you've felt you followed Johova's direction and then
you've had problems. So we used to understanding that situation. But what happened that very night?
An earthquake. The doors of the prison open up. The jailer and his family accept the truth. And then
this is where it proves that Johova has style. Those magistrates apologize. The Paul Paul says,
no, you take us out and you escort us out of the city. Now, that's style. And as we read,
what do we notice? I imagine this in my mind, it says Paul said goodbye to Lydia. And I imagine,
maybe I'm wrong, but I'm imagining the magistrates standing outside Lydia's home waiting for Paul to
say goodbye and then continuing to escort them out of the city. Now, not only is that style,
but it was practical because it appears that perhaps Luke, the doctor, was left to stay there
in Philippi and established the congregation. And no doubt those magistrates would have thought
twice before they did anything bad to the Christians after that. But what's the point? At times,
we may feel that there's no way out of our problems. But surely the lesson that we learn over and
over and over again is that Johova can turn things completely around. Yes, even though we may
speculate and think, what if maybe he'll do this? In the end, when we look back on events,
we can't help but be impressed with how Johova handles things. He has everything and under control.
So that brings us back to the regional convention, the Sunday program. We all enjoyed that's
imposing of talks with the little videos dealing with the great tribulation. Maybe for most of us,
it took us a while to work out what were they doing in the basement. Usually, by the time there was a
knock, then we started to realize that it was at the time of the great tribulation. And with
excitement, we watched as that door opened and there the police, the military were facing our brothers
and sisters. And you were waiting, will the angel come and take them out? Will fire come from heaven?
And we were left hanging. Why? The simple answer? We don't know. But one thing is for sure,
if Johova is on our side, we do not need to fear men. Yes, it's true. We don't know all the details
of the great tribulation. We don't know exactly what's going to happen in the future. But we do know
that our loving Heavenly Father, Johova God, has everything under control. Yes, he has
styled, so we can expect the unexpected. I used to give talks like that when I was young.
We have another blessing. It has to be presented by the tongue of brother Anthony Morse.
Listen carefully as he develops the theme, run to Johova. I had to say I remember those talks.
I miss them so much, Sam. Expect the unexpected. Thank you very much.
Now I have to get very serious.
Johova and his holy word forewarned us to expect ridicule for our conviction that he's going to
destroy Satan's wicked system of things. Quoting scripture, where is this promised presence of his
all things are continuing exactly as they were from creations beginning? In other words,
everything's the same. Nothing's really changed. Our things really the same.
Well, here in the United States, among the many shootings, I'm thinking of the one
not too long ago down in Dallas, Texas, and this man was shooting at police officers and they caught
video of it, and people didn't know what the shooting was about or who was particular target,
so they started to run. They didn't know where they were running, but they were just looking for safety.
So running, looking for safety, panic was in their faces. You could see it on the video.
Now, during these final days of Satan's rule all over the world, people are frightened.
They don't know where to go to be safe, but we have something that direct them to turn to
Proverbs chapter 18, and this is where we have a theme for this final talk here at our annual
meeting. Proverbs 18 and verse 10. The name of Johova is a strong tower into it, the righteous one
runs, and receives protection. Yes, as wickedness advances from bed to worse, we have to
run to Johova to be protected, to be safe. And once we're in the tower to remain there, that means
we look to Johova in faith and obedience, and we recognize how important it is to faithfully
represent that name. So the purpose of this talk is to encourage all of us to run to Johova,
the ones of us that have run to him, don't lose heart, and be busy teaching others that they
better run to Johova before it's too late. Now, the end is very close in its obvious. Why is it
obvious? Well, we're going to review some fundamental truths that are so spiritually fortifying,
and you really can't review them often enough. Matthew chapter 24, and we're going to
clearly emphasize why we know we're close. Matthew 24, after Jesus here, that has mentioned what's
going to happen to the temple. And of course, he gets the third verse here, where the disciples
and private approach him, which repeated James, John, and Andrew, and they want to know, when will
these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence, and of the conclusion of the system of
things? So this presence, referring to Jesus' enthronement as King and his royal visit to this
earth. Now, what stands out that we have the increase of lawlessness, and you might keep in mind,
that's not just criminal lawlessness, that's disdain for Johova's law. See, people forget that,
and look at the disdain for Johova's law. Now, after he emphasizes in verse 36 that no human's
going to know the day or the hour, notice what Jesus stated, verse 37, for just as the days of
Noah were, so the presence of the Son of Man will be, for as they were on those days, before the
flood eating and drinking, men marrying, and women being given in marriage, until the day that Noah
entered into the ark, and they took no note, until the flood came and swept them all away, so the
presence of the Son of Man will be. So there we have this clear comparison, he goes back to the days
of Noah, and they took no note, and we see the same today, while we rejoice with the thousands
that are dedicating themselves to Johova God and getting baptized each year, the fact is,
all over the earth, by far the majority, take no note. They're busy about, they're daily affairs,
and they're not interested. They don't want to run to Johova, it just doesn't have any appeal.
To make such changes. Now, what sometimes seems to be forgotten is, found here in Genesis chapter 6,
why did Johova take the action? Genesis chapter 6, let's remind ourselves of what really
brought this to a head, to where Johova took action, and it's connected with our day,
because this is what's motivating him to soon take action. Here we find Genesis 6 and verse 5,
consequently, Johova saw that man's wickedness was great on the earth, and that every inclination
of the thoughts of his heart was only bad all the time. Now notice this, it's very significant,
verse 11, but the earth had become ruined in the sight of the true God. Why? The earth was filled
with violence. Sound familiar? The earth was filled with violence. It stayed that way for some time,
and then finally, Johova is fed up with the violence, and notice verse 13,
after that God said to Noah, I have decided to put an end to all flesh because the earth is full
of violence on account of them, so I'm bringing them to ruin together with the earth, full of violence.
See, same thing today, this earth is full of violence, but that's what moved Johova to act,
and then the violence continued in chapter 7 verse 1, go into the ark, after the years of
constructing it, Johova had had enough of the violence. Now this is pertinent. In 1987, the May 15th
Watchtower, page 20, paragraph 18, made this profound statement related to the flood in connecting
it with our day. Many of those who died in the flood, no doubt considered themselves nice people,
not being involved in the violence that filled society in those days, but just being nice did
not save them. By their apathy, they condoned the evil of their day. The crucial thing was that
they did not run to Johova. They did not listen when God servants spoke, so they did not take the
proper steps for survival. And that's where we are now. See, people must understand, we have to
preach and teach them, they need to run to Johova now before it's too late. And during his presence
all through these decades ruling in the midst of his enemies, you have to accept the fact that
the degree of violence at this point is mind-numbing. It's all over the earth, violence. And it
isn't just because the media and the internet and such, it's just filled with violence.
So that keep in mind, and we see that today, and something else Jesus connected when he was
comparing his presence with the days of Noah, and note this here in Luke 17, and this is the second
thing that just makes it very obvious, we are so close and Johova is going to take action.
And this is his judgment now. We would have people in general, some countries would find
what we're going to discuss here, hate mongering, but we will never water down,
Johova's word. It's sticking close with it. These are the words of Jesus Christ. They want to take
issue with him. Let him go ahead. Luke chapter 17, the Pharisees want to know when the kingdom's
coming. Now in verse 26 of Luke 17, he makes the connection about the days of Noah, which we just
addressed and how he entered into the ark. Now let's read 28 through 30, likewise. Just as it
occurred in the days of Lot, they were eating, they were drinking, they were buying, they were selling,
they were planning, they were building. But on the day that Lot went out of Sodom,
it rained fire and sulfur from heaven and destroyed them all. It will be the same on that day
when the Son of Man is revealed. Oh, yeah. When Jesus is revealed at the great tribulation,
that's it. Johova's fed up with the sexual depravity as well. Now two other Bible writers
connect these two events and that's why we see how close where if you look at the world today,
it's right before our eyes. Notice Jude here. Let's turn over to Jude and he's inspired to
encourage us, especially those who have already run to Johova. Jude 6, and we're going to read
6 in the letter Jude. In the angels who did not keep their original position, but for
sook their own proper dwelling place, he has reserved with eternal bonds in dense darkness
for the judgment of the great day. So here we have it. This was a perversion, unnatural,
and he's addressing this. Johova's inspired Jude to write this. These disobedient angels,
they materialize bodies as we all know and cohabited with women and they produced offspring,
half human, half demon. Very difficult time for the earth and Johova found that despicable. Now,
this part of what happened prior to the flood of Noah's day is connected with verse 7,
this sexual depravity, let's read verse 7, in the same manner,
Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities around them also gave themselves over to gross sexual
immorality and pursued unnatural, fleshly desires. They are placed before us as a warning example
by undergoing the judicial punishment of everlasting fire. So, Johova doesn't mention any words here.
This sexual depravity found in the cities throughout this earth, he's had enough of it,
and you'd have to admit that just like the scriptures bring out in Genesis,
chapter 13 and 18, Johova said this cry of complaint was going up, and all of the perverted ones,
and not just Sodom and Gomorrah, but the cities nearby, and this cry of complaint was just too much
for Johova to take and he took action. See, however, what about our day? Well, the sexual depravity,
they don't think they're depraved, and our saying so is judgmental, offensive, at least to them,
and we don't intend to try to deliberately offend people, we just, this is what the scriptures
teach. It's perverted, and we support Johova's judgment on that. However, the spirit of Satan's
world is how foolish to believe that the story of the flood and the story of Sodom and Gomorrah are true.
You people are foolish. Well, these stories are true, and Peter really makes it very clear here,
as he's inspired to write this second Peter and the second chapter, and so we loved Johova for
inspiring him to make this so clear, because it helps us to understand how close we are,
and see second Peter 2, 4, through 6. Certainly, God did not reframe from punishing the angels
who sinned, but through them into tiredness, supporting them in chains of dense darkness to be
reserved for judgment, and he did not reframe from punishing an ancient world, but kept Noah,
a preacher of righteousness, safe, with seven others when he brought a flood upon a world of
ungodly people. Now notice this for found point, verse 6, and by reducing the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah to ashes, he condemned them setting a pattern for ungodly people of things to come.
That's the pattern. All these ungodly people, what Johova did in the flood as well as in the
day of Sodom and Gomorrah and judged them there, there's the pattern. That's their future if they
choose not to run to Johova. So considering this scriptural evidence, the earth is filled with
violence and sexual depravity, it's just so clear we're so close to the great tribulation
and contemplating what may occur and it connects with brother Jackson's comments about the great
tribulation. We just need to trust in Johova with all our heart and not lean on our own understanding.
Say, and how reassuring to know that very soon no one will worry about their safety or the
safety of their loved ones. The violence of the last days will be done away with all the sexually
immoral people who brazenly flaunt our precious Johova's laws will be destroyed just as they were
in Sodom and Gomorrah. So rest assured, Johova, here's our cry of complaint, do not lose heart.
All you righteous worshipers of the true God remember, the name of Johova is a strong tower
into it, the righteous runs and receives protection. Thank you very much for the
more. So that was a fine conclusion to this wonderful program. We have received blessings of
galore in the form of things that are true, serious concern, righteous, chase, lovable,
well spoken on, virtuous, praiseworthy, good, and acceptable.
We already announced that depending on the direction you will be going when you leave the building,
you can use the side doors onto Pavonia Avenue or go through the main lobby and exit through the
front. Well, is there any other announcement that I can make? Yes, there is. In fact, the governing
body requested that the following announcement be made today. Are you ready? Well, let me set the
stage for the announcement. As you might have guessed, there have been many questions and some
wild speculations about the upcoming dedication program for the Wal-Kill and Warwick completed
facilities. You're about to get the definitive answer. Our announcement reads this way.
The governing body is pleased to inform you that the new facilities at Wal-Kill and Warwick will
be dedicated in conjunction with the annual meeting program on October the 7th, 2017.
The annual meeting and dedication program will originate from world headquarters in the auditorium
at Warwick. Hence the number of attendees that will enjoy it live in the auditorium will be
limited. However, the governing body has approved that the program will be streamed to all
Bethel facilities in the United States and all assembly halls in the United States, including
here at the Jersey City assembly hall. In this way, it is hoped that all who volunteered to work
on the Wal-Kill and Warwick projects will be able to attend the annual meeting and the dedication
program associated therewith. However, the program will not be streamed to other branch offices
or assembly halls in other lands. The United States Branch Committee will be providing more
details about the arrangements in due time. Again, the dedication of Wal-Kill and Warwick
facilities will be in connection with the annual meeting on October the 7th, 2017. Your
brothers, the governing body of Jehovah's Witnesses. That brings us to the conclusion of our program,
and I invite all of you to stand and sing another of our new songs. We know it for the time being
as song number 136. The kingdom is in place and let it come. Please sing this majestic song with
full throat just as it deserves. Song number 136.